.TH hunspell 5 "2026-04-30"
.LO 1
.SH NAME
hunspell \- format of Hunspell dictionaries and affix files
.SH DESCRIPTION
.IR Hunspell (1)
requires two files to define the way a language is being spell-checked:
a dictionary file containing words and applicable flags, and an affix
file that specifies how these flags control spell checking. The personal
dictionary file is an optional third file.

.SH Dictionary file
A dictionary file (*.dic) contains a list of words, one per line.
The first line of a dictionary (except personal dictionaries)
contains the approximate word count (for optimal hash memory size).
Each word may optionally be followed by a slash ("/") and one or
more flags, which represent the word's attributes (for example,
affixes).

Note: Dictionary words can also contain slashes if escaped as "\\/".

It is worth adding not only individual words but also word pairs to
the dictionary, to get correct suggestions for common misspellings
that are missing a space, as in the following example for the bad
"alot" and "inspite" (see also "REP" and the "ph:" field for
correct suggestions for common misspellings):

.PP
.RS
.nf
3
word
a lot
in spite
.fi
.RE
.PP

.SH Personal dictionary file
Personal dictionaries are simple word lists. An asterisk in the first
character position marks the entry as forbidden.
A second word separated by a slash sets the affixation.

.PP
.RS
.nf
foo
Foo/Simpson
*bar
.fi
.RE
.PP

In this example, "foo" and "Foo" are personal words, plus Foo
will be recognized with affixes of Simpson (Foo's etc.) and
bar is a forbidden word.

.SH Short example

Dictionary file:
.PP
.RS
.nf
3
hello
try/B
work/AB
.fi
.RE
.PP
The flags B and A specify attributes of these words.

Affix file:

.PP
.RS
.nf
SET UTF-8
TRY esianrtolcdugmphbyfvkwzESIANRTOLCDUGMPHBYFVKWZ'

REP 2
REP f ph
REP ph f

PFX A Y 1
PFX A 0 re .

SFX B Y 2
SFX B 0 ed [^y]
SFX B y ied y
.fi
.RE
.PP

In the affix file, prefix A and suffix B have been defined.
Flag A defines a `re-' prefix. Class B defines two `-ed'
suffixes. First B suffix can be added to a word if
the last character of the word isn't `y'.
Second suffix can be added to the words terminated with an `y'.

All accepted words with this dictionary and affix combination are:
"hello", "try", "tried", "work", "worked", "rework", "reworked".

.SH "AFFIX FILE GENERAL OPTIONS"

Hunspell source distribution contains more than 80 examples for
option usage.

.IP "SET encoding"
Set character encoding of words and morphemes in affix and dictionary files.
Possible values: UTF-8, ISO8859\-1 \- ISO8859\-10, 
ISO8859\-13 \- ISO8859\-15, KOI8-R, KOI8-U, cp1251, ISCII-DEVANAGARI.
.PP
.RS
.nf
SET UTF-8
.fi
.RE
.PP

.IP "FLAG value"
Set flag type. Default type is the extended ASCII (8-bit) character. 
`UTF-8' parameter sets UTF-8 encoded Unicode character flags.
The `long' value sets the double extended ASCII character flag type;
the `num' value sets the decimal number flag type. Decimal flags are
numbered from 1 to 65000 and are separated by commas in flag fields.
.PP
.RS
.nf
FLAG long
.fi
.RE
.PP

.IP "COMPLEXPREFIXES"
Set twofold prefix stripping (but single suffix stripping), e.g. for morphologically complex
languages with a right-to-left writing system.

.IP "LANG langcode"
Set language code for language-specific functions of Hunspell. Use it to activate special casing
of Azeri (LANG az), Turkish (LANG tr) and Crimean Tatar (LANG crh), and the
non-generalized syllable-counting compounding rules of Hungarian (LANG hu).

.IP "IGNORE characters"
Set characters to ignore in dictionary words, affixes and input words.
Useful for optional characters such as Arabic (harakat) or Hebrew
(niqqud) diacritical marks (see the tests/ignore.* test dictionary
in the Hunspell distribution).

.IP "AF number_of_flag_vector_aliases"
.IP "AF flag_vector"
Hunspell can substitute affix flag sets with
ordinal numbers in affix rules (alias compression, see makealias tool). First
example with alias compression:
.PP
.RS
.nf
3
hello
try/1
work/2
.fi
.RE
.PP
AF definitions in the affix file:
.PP
.RS
.nf
AF 2
AF A
AF AB
...
.fi
.RE
.PP

It is equivalent to the following dic file:
.PP
.RS
.nf
3
hello
try/A
work/AB
.fi
.RE
.PP

See also tests/alias* examples of the source distribution.

Note I: If the affix file contains the FLAG parameter, define it before
the AF definitions.

Note II: Use the makealias utility in the Hunspell distribution to
compress aff and dic files.
.IP "AM number_of_morphological_aliases"
.IP "AM morphological_fields"
Hunspell can also substitute morphological data with ordinal numbers
in affix rules (alias compression). See tests/alias* examples.
.SH "AFFIX FILE OPTIONS FOR SUGGESTION"
Suggestion parameters can optimize Hunspell's default n-gram (similarity
search through the dictionary words based on common 1-, 2-, 3-, and
4-character sequences), character-swap and deletion suggestions.
REP is recommended for fixing typical and especially bad
language-specific spelling errors, because REP suggestions have the
highest priority in the suggestion list.
PHONE is for languages whose orthography is not pronunciation-based.

For short common misspellings, it's important to use the ph:
field (see later) to give the best suggestions.
.IP "KEY characters_separated_by_vertical_line_optionally"
Hunspell searches for and suggests words in which a single character
has been replaced by a neighbouring KEY character. Non-neighbouring
characters in the KEY string are separated by vertical line characters.
Suggested KEY parameters for QWERTY and Dvorak keyboard layouts:
.PP
.RS
.nf
KEY qwertyuiop|asdfghjkl|zxcvbnm
KEY pyfgcrl|aeouidhtns|qjkxbmwvz
.fi
.RE
.PP
Using the first QWERTY layout, Hunspell suggests "nude" and
"node" for "*nide". A character may have more neighbors, too:
.PP
.RS
.nf
KEY qwertzuop|yxcvbnm|qaw|say|wse|dsx|sy|edr|fdc|dx|rft|gfv|fc|tgz|hgb|gv|zhu|jhn|hb|uji|kjm|jn|iko|lkm
.fi
.RE
.PP
.IP "TRY characters"
Hunspell can suggest correct word forms when they differ from the
bad input word by one TRY character. The parameter of TRY is
case-sensitive.
.IP "NOSUGGEST flag"
Words flagged with NOSUGGEST are not suggested (but are still accepted
when typed correctly). Proposed for vulgar and obscene words (see also
SUBSTANDARD).
.IP "MAXCPDSUGS num"
Set the maximum number of suggested compound words generated by
compound rules. The number of suggested compound words from the same
1-character-distance type may exceed this.
.IP "MAXNGRAMSUGS num"
Set the maximum number of n-gram suggestions. A value of 0 switches off
n-gram suggestions (see also MAXDIFF).
.IP "MAXDIFF [0-10]"
Set the similarity factor for the n-gram based suggestions (5 = default value; 0 = fewer n-gram suggestions, but min. 1;
10 = MAXNGRAMSUGS n-gram suggestions).
.IP "ONLYMAXDIFF"
Remove all bad n-gram suggestions (default mode keeps one, see MAXDIFF).
.IP "NOSPLITSUGS"
Disable word suggestions with spaces.
.IP "SUGSWITHDOTS"
Add dot(s) to suggestions, if input word terminates in dot(s).
(Not for LibreOffice dictionaries, because LibreOffice
has an automatic dot expansion mechanism.)
.IP "REP number_of_replacement_definitions"
.IP "REP what replacement"
This table specifies modifications to try first.
The first REP line is the header of the table, followed by one or
more REP data lines.
With this table, Hunspell can suggest correct forms for typical
spelling mistakes where the incorrect form differs by more than
one letter from the correct form (see also "ph:").
The search string supports the regex boundary anchors (^ and $).
For example, a possible English replacement table definition
to handle misspelled consonants:
.PP
.RS
.nf
REP 5
REP f ph
REP ph f
REP tion$ shun
REP ^cooccurr co-occurr
REP ^alot$ a_lot
.fi
.RE
.PP

Note I: It's very useful to define replacements for the most typical one-character mistakes, too:
with REP you can add higher priority to a subset of the TRY suggestions (suggestion list
begins with the REP suggestions).

Note II: To suggest separated words, specify spaces as underscores:

.PP
.RS
.nf
REP 1
REP onetwothree one_two_three
.fi
.RE
.PP

Note III: The replacement table can be used for stricter compound word
checking with the CHECKCOMPOUNDREP option.

.IP "MAP number_of_map_definitions"
.IP "MAP string_of_related_chars_or_parenthesized_character_sequences"
We can define language-dependent information on characters and
character sequences that should be considered related (i.e. nearer than
other chars not in the set) in the affix file (.aff)  by a map table.
With this table, Hunspell can suggest the right forms for words, which
incorrectly choose the wrong letter or letter groups from a related
set more than once in a word (see REP).

For example, a possible mapping could be for the German
umlauted ü versus the regular u; the word
Frühstück really should be written with umlauted u's and not regular ones.
.PP
.RS
.nf
MAP 1
MAP uü
.fi
.RE
.PP
Use parenthesized groups for character sequences (eg. for
composed Unicode characters):
.PP
.RS
.nf
MAP 3
MAP ß(ss)  (character sequence)
MAP ﬁ(fi)  ("fi" compatibility characters for Unicode fi ligature)
MAP (ọ́)o   (composed Unicode character: ó with bottom dot)
.fi
.RE
.PP
.IP "PHONE number_of_phone_definitions"
.IP "PHONE what replacement"
PHONE uses a table-driven phonetic transcription
algorithm borrowed from Aspell. It is useful for languages whose
orthography is not pronunciation-based. You can add a full
alphabet conversion and other rules for converting
special letter sequences. For detailed documentation see
http://aspell.net/man-html/Phonetic-Code.html.
Note: Multibyte UTF-8 characters do not yet work with bracket
expressions. Dash range expressions still operate on single bytes,
not UTF-8 characters.
.IP "WARN flag"
This flag is for rare words, which are also often spelling mistakes,
see option -r of command line Hunspell and FORBIDWARN.
.IP "FORBIDWARN"
Words with flag WARN aren't accepted by the spell checker using this parameter.
.SH "OPTIONS FOR COMPOUNDING"
.IP "BREAK number_of_break_definitions"
.IP "BREAK character_or_character_sequence"
Define new break points for splitting words and checking word parts
separately. Use ^ and $ to delete characters at the start and end of
the word. Rationale: useful for compounding with joining characters
or strings (for example, the hyphen in English and German or the
hyphen and n-dash in Hungarian). Dashes are often bad break points
for tokenization, because compounds with dashes may also contain
invalid parts.
With BREAK, Hunspell can check both sides of these compounds,
breaking the words at dashes and n-dashes:
.PP
.RS
.nf
BREAK 2
BREAK -
BREAK \fB--\fR    # n-dash
.fi
.RE
.PP
Breaks are recursive, so foo-bar, bar-foo and foo-foo\fB--\fRbar-bar
would all be valid compounds.
Note: The default word break of Hunspell is equivalent to the following
BREAK definition:
.PP
.RS
.nf
BREAK 3
BREAK -
BREAK ^-
BREAK -$
.fi
.RE
.PP
With this BREAK definition, Hunspell doesn't accept the "-word" and "word-" forms:
.PP
.RS
.nf
BREAK 1
BREAK -
.fi
.RE
.PP

Switching off the default values:
.PP
.RS
.nf
BREAK 0
.fi
.RE
.PP

Note II: COMPOUNDRULE is better for handling dashes and other compound
joining characters or character strings. Use BREAK if you want to check
words with dashes or other joining characters and there is no time or
ability to describe precise compound rules with COMPOUNDRULE
(COMPOUNDRULE only handles the suffixation of the last word part of a
compound word).

Note III: For command-line spell checking of words with extra characters,
set the WORDCHARS parameter: WORDCHARS -\fB--\fR (see the tests/break.*
example).
.IP "COMPOUNDRULE number_of_compound_definitions"
.IP "COMPOUNDRULE compound_pattern"
Define custom compound patterns with a regex-like syntax.
The first COMPOUNDRULE line is a header containing the number of
following COMPOUNDRULE definitions. Compound patterns consist of
compound flags, parentheses, and `*' or `?' meta-characters. A flag
followed by `*' matches a word sequence of 0 or more words flagged
with this compound flag. A flag followed by `?' matches 0 or 1 words
flagged with this compound flag. See the tests/compound*.* examples.

Note: the en_US dictionary of OpenOffice.org uses COMPOUNDRULE for
ordinal number recognition (1st, 2nd, 11th, 12th, 22nd, 112th, 1000122nd, etc.).

Note II: With long and numerical flag types, use only parenthesized
flags: (1500)*(2000)?

Note III: COMPOUNDRULE flags work completely independently of the
compounding mechanisms using COMPOUNDFLAG, COMPOUNDBEGIN, etc.
(Use these flags on different word entries.)

.IP "COMPOUNDMIN num"
Minimum length of words used for compounding.
Default value is 3 letters.

.IP "MAXCPDSUGS num"
Max Compound Suggestions. Use 0 to disable suggesting from compounds.
Default value is unlimited.

.IP "COMPOUNDFLAG flag"
Words flagged with COMPOUNDFLAG may appear in compound words (except
when the word is shorter than COMPOUNDMIN). Affixes with COMPOUNDFLAG
also permit compounding of affixed words.
.IP "COMPOUNDBEGIN flag"
Words flagged with COMPOUNDBEGIN (or with a flagged affix) may
be first elements in compound words.
.IP "COMPOUNDLAST flag"
Words flagged with COMPOUNDLAST (or with a flagged affix) may be last elements in compound words.
.IP "COMPOUNDMIDDLE flag"
Words flagged with COMPOUNDMIDDLE (or with a flagged affix) may be middle elements in compound words.
.IP "ONLYINCOMPOUND flag"
Suffixes flagged with ONLYINCOMPOUND may only appear inside compounds
(Fuge-elements in German, fogemorphemes in Swedish).
The ONLYINCOMPOUND flag also works on words (see tests/onlyincompound.*).
Note: also useful to flag compounding parts which are not correct as a
word on their own.
.IP "COMPOUNDPERMITFLAG flag"
Prefixes are allowed at the beginning of compounds,
suffixes are allowed at the end of compounds by default.
Affixes with COMPOUNDPERMITFLAG may be inside of compounds.
.IP "COMPOUNDFORBIDFLAG flag"
Suffixes with this flag forbid compounding of the affixed word.
Dictionary words with this flag are removed from the beginning and
middle of compound words, overriding the effect of COMPOUNDPERMITFLAG.
.IP "COMPOUNDMORESUFFIXES"
Allow twofold suffixes within compounds.
.IP "COMPOUNDROOT flag"
The COMPOUNDROOT flag marks compounds in the dictionary
(currently only used in the Hungarian language-specific code).
.IP "COMPOUNDWORDMAX number"
Set maximum word count in a compound word. (Default is unlimited.)
.IP "CHECKCOMPOUNDDUP"
Forbid word duplication in compounds (e.g. foofoo).
.IP "CHECKCOMPOUNDREP"
Forbid compounding, if the (usually bad) compound word may be
a non-compound word with a REP fault. Useful for languages with
`compound friendly' orthography.
.IP "CHECKCOMPOUNDCASE"
Forbid upper case characters at word boundaries in compounds.
.IP "CHECKCOMPOUNDTRIPLE"
Forbid compounding, if compound word contains triple repeating letters
(e.g. foo|ox or xo|oof). Bug: missing multi-byte character support
in UTF-8 encoding (works only for 7-bit ASCII characters).
.IP "SIMPLIFIEDTRIPLE"
Allow simplified 2-letter forms of the compounds forbidden by CHECKCOMPOUNDTRIPLE.
It's useful for Swedish and Norwegian (and for
the old German orthography: Schiff|fahrt -> Schiffahrt).
.IP "CHECKCOMPOUNDPATTERN number_of_checkcompoundpattern_definitions"
.IP "CHECKCOMPOUNDPATTERN endchars[/flag] beginchars[/flag] [replacement]"
Forbid compounding, if the first word in the compound ends with endchars, and
next word begins with beginchars and (optionally) they have the requested flags.
The optional replacement parameter allows simplified compound form.

The special "endchars" pattern 0 (zero) limits the rule to the unmodified stems (stems
and stems with zero affixes):
.PP
.RS
.nf
CHECKCOMPOUNDPATTERN 0/x /y
.fi
.RE
.PP
Note: COMPOUNDMIN doesn't work correctly with the compound word alternation,
so it may need to set COMPOUNDMIN to lower value.
.IP "FORCEUCASE flag"
If the last word part of a compound has the FORCEUCASE flag, it forces
capitalization of the whole compound word. E.g. the Dutch word "straat"
(street) with the FORCEUCASE flag will be allowed only in capitalized
compound forms, according to the Dutch spelling rules for proper names.
.IP "COMPOUNDSYLLABLE max_syllable vowels"
Needed for special compounding rules in Hungarian.
The first parameter is the maximum syllable count permitted in a
compound when the number of words in the compound exceeds
COMPOUNDWORDMAX. The second parameter is the list of vowels (used
for counting syllables).
.IP "SYLLABLENUM flags"
Needed for special compounding rules in Hungarian.
.SH "AFFIX FILE OPTIONS FOR AFFIX CREATION"
.IP "PFX flag cross_product number"
.IP "PFX flag stripping prefix [condition [morphological_fields...]]"
.IP "SFX flag cross_product number"
.IP "SFX flag stripping suffix [condition [morphological_fields...]]"
An affix is either a prefix or a suffix attached to root words to form
other words. Affix classes can be defined with an arbitrary number of
affix rules. Affix classes are identified by affix flags. The first
line of an affix class definition is the header. The fields of an affix class header:

(0) Option name (PFX or SFX)

(1) Flag (name of the affix class)

(2) Cross product (permission to combine prefixes and suffixes).
Possible values: Y (yes) or N (no)

(3) Line count of the following rules.

Fields of an affix rules:

(0) Option name

(1) Flag

(2) stripping characters from beginning (at prefix rules) or
end (at suffix rules) of the word

(3) affix (optionally with flags of continuation classes, separated by a slash)

(4) condition.

Zero stripping or affix is indicated by zero. A zero condition is
indicated by a dot. The condition is a simplified, regular-expression-like
pattern that must be met before the affix can be applied. (A dot matches
an arbitrary character. Characters in brackets match any character from
the bracketed subset. A dash has no special meaning, but a circumflex
(^) immediately after the opening bracket inverts the character set.)

(5) Optional morphological fields separated by spaces or tabs.

.SH "AFFIX FILE OTHER OPTIONS"
.IP "CIRCUMFIX flag"
An affix flagged with CIRCUMFIX may be applied to a word only when the
word also has a prefix with CIRCUMFIX, and vice versa (see the
circumfix.* test files in the source distribution).
.IP "FORBIDDENWORD flag"
This flag marks a forbidden word form. Because affixed forms are also
forbidden, we can subtract a subset from the set of accepted affixed
and compound words.
Note: useful for forbidding erroneous words generated by the compounding
mechanism.
.IP "FULLSTRIP"
With FULLSTRIP, affix rules can strip the full word, not only all but
one character, before adding the affixes (see the fullstrip.* test
files in the source distribution).
Note: even without FULLSTRIP, conditions may match the full word length.
.IP "KEEPCASE flag"
Forbid uppercased and capitalized forms of words flagged with KEEPCASE.
Useful for special orthographies (measurements and currency often keep
their case even in uppercased texts) and writing systems (e.g. keeping
the lower case of IPA characters). Also useful for words that would
otherwise be erroneously written in the wrong case.

Note: With CHECKSHARPS declaration, words with sharp s and KEEPCASE
flag may be capitalized and uppercased, but uppercased forms of these
words may not contain sharp s, only SS. See germancompounding
example in the tests directory of the Hunspell distribution.

.IP "ICONV number_of_ICONV_definitions"
.IP "ICONV pattern pattern2"
Define input conversion table.
Use underscore '_' to represent the last character of the string.
For e.g. if you need to change <200D> to <FFF0> only if it appears at the end of the word, then ...

ICONV <200D>_ <FFF0>

Note: useful to convert one type of quote to another one, or change ligature.
.IP "OCONV number_of_OCONV_definitions"
.IP "OCONV pattern pattern2"
Define output conversion table.
.IP "LEMMA_PRESENT flag"
Deprecated. Use "st:" field instead of LEMMA_PRESENT.
.IP "NEEDAFFIX flag"
This flag marks virtual stems in the dictionary: words only valid when
affixed (except when the dictionary word has a homonym or a zero affix).
NEEDAFFIX also works with prefixes and prefix + suffix combinations
(see tests/needaffix5.*).
.IP "PSEUDOROOT flag"
Deprecated. (Former name of the NEEDAFFIX option.)
.IP "SUBSTANDARD flag"
The SUBSTANDARD flag marks affix rules and dictionary words (allomorphs)
that are not used in morphological generation, and root words to be
removed from suggestions. See also NOSUGGEST.
.IP "WORDCHARS characters"
WORDCHARS extends the tokenizer of the Hunspell command-line interface
with additional word characters. For example, the dot, dash, n-dash,
digits, and percent sign are word characters in Hungarian.
.IP "CHECKSHARPS"
SS letter pair in uppercased (German) words may be upper case sharp s (ß).
Hunspell can handle this special casing with the CHECKSHARPS
declaration (see also KEEPCASE flag and tests/germancompounding example)
in both spelling and suggestion.

.SH "Morphological analysis"

Hunspell's dictionary items and affix rules may have optional space or
tabulator separated morphological description fields, started with
3-character (two letters and a colon) field IDs:

.PP
.RS
.nf
 word/flags po:noun is:nom
.fi
.RE
.PP

Example: We define a simple resource with morphological informations,
a derivative suffix (ds:) and a part of speech category (po:):

Affix file:

.PP
.RS
.nf
 SFX X Y 1
 SFX X 0 able . ds:able
.fi
.RE
.PP

Dictionary file:

.PP
.RS
.nf
 drink/X po:verb
.fi
.RE
.PP

Test file:

.PP
.RS
.nf
 drink
 drinkable
.fi
.RE
.PP

Test:

.PP
.RS
.nf
 $ analyze test.aff test.dic test.txt
 > drink
 analyze(drink) = po:verb
 stem(drink) = po:verb
 > drinkable
 analyze(drinkable) = po:verb ds:able
 stem(drinkable) = drinkable
.fi
.RE
.PP

You can see in the example, that the analyzer concatenates the morphological fields in
\fIitem and arrangement\fR
style.

.SH "Optional data fields"
Default morphological and other IDs (used in suggestion,
stemming and morphological generation):
.IP "ph:"
Alternative transliteration for better suggestions, i.e. for
misspellings related to the special orthography and pronunciation
of the word. This is the best way to handle common misspellings,
so it is worth adding a ph: field to the most affected few thousand
dictionary words (or word pairs etc.) to get correct suggestions
for their misspellings.


For example:

.PP
.RS
.nf
Wednesday ph:wendsay ph:wensday
Marseille ph:maarsayl
.fi
.RE
.PP

Hunspell adds all ph: transliterations to the inner REP table, so
it will always suggest the correct word for the specified
misspellings with the highest priority.

The previous example is equivalent to the following REP definition:

.PP
.RS
.nf
REP 6
REP wendsay Wednesday
REP Wendsay Wednesday
REP wensday Wednesday
REP Wensday Wednesday
REP maarsayl Marseille
REP Maarsayl Marseille
.fi
.RE
.PP

The asterisk at the end of the ph: pattern means stripping the
terminating character both from the pattern and the word in the
associated REP rule:

.PP
.RS
.nf
pretty ph:prity*
.fi
.RE
.PP

will result

.PP
.RS
.nf
REP 1
REP prit prett
.fi
.RE
.PP

REP rule, resulting in the following correct suggestions:

.PP
.RS
.nf
*prity -> pretty
*pritier -> prettier
*pritiest -> prettiest
.fi
.RE
.PP

Moreover, ph: fields can handle suggestions with more than
two words, also different suggestions for the same
misspelling:
.PP
.RS
.nf
do not know ph:dunno
don't know ph:dunno
.fi
.RE
.PP

results

.PP
.RS
.nf
*dunno -> do not know, don't know
.fi
.RE
.PP

Note: if available, ph: is used in n-gram similarity, too.

The ASCII arrow "->" in a ph: pattern means a REP rule (see REP),
creating an arbitrary replacement rule associated with the dictionary
item:
.PP
.RS
.nf
happy/B ph:hepy ph:hepi->happi
.fi
.RE
.PP

results

.PP
.RS
.nf
*hepy -> happy
*hepiest -> happiest
.fi
.RE
.PP

.IP "st:"
Stem. Optional: the default stem is the dictionary item in morphological
analysis. The stem field is useful for virtual stems (dictionary words
with the NEEDAFFIX flag) and for morphological exceptions, in place of
new single-use morphological rules.
.PP
.RS
.nf
feet  st:foot  is:plural
mice  st:mouse is:plural
teeth st:tooth is:plural
.fi
.RE
.PP

Word forms with multiple stems need multiple dictionary items:

.PP
.RS
.nf
lay po:verb st:lie is:past_2
lay po:verb is:present
lay po:noun
.fi
.RE
.PP

.IP "al:"
Allomorph(s). A dictionary item is the stem of its allomorphs.
Morphological generation needs stem, allomorph and
affix fields.
.PP
.RS
.nf
sing al:sang al:sung
sang st:sing
sung st:sing
.fi
.RE
.PP
.IP "po:"
Part of speech category.
.IP "ds:"
Derivational suffix(es).
Stemming doesn't remove derivational suffixes.
Morphological generation depends on the order of the suffix fields.

In affix rules:

.PP
.RS
.nf
SFX Y Y 1
SFX Y 0 ly . ds:ly_adj
.fi
.RE
.PP

In the dictionary:

.PP
.RS
.nf
ably st:able ds:ly_adj
able al:ably
.fi
.RE
.PP

.IP "is:"
Inflectional suffix(es).
All inflectional suffixes are removed by stemming.
Morphological generation depends on the order of the suffix fields.

.PP
.RS
.nf
feet st:foot is:plural
.fi
.RE
.PP

.IP "ts:"
Terminal suffix(es).
Terminal suffix fields are inflectional suffix fields
"removed" by additional (not terminal) suffixes.

Useful for zero morphemes and affixes removed by splitting rules.

.PP
.RS
.nf
work/D ts:present
.fi
.RE
.PP


.PP
.RS
.nf
SFX D Y 2
SFX D   0 ed . is:past_1
SFX D   0 ed . is:past_2
.fi
.RE
.PP

Typical example of the terminal suffix is the zero morpheme
of the nominative case.

.IP "sp:"
Surface prefix. Temporary solution for adding prefixes to the
stems and generated word forms. See tests/morph.* example.

.IP "pa:"
Parts of the compound words. Output fields of morphological 
analysis for stemming.
.IP "dp:"
Planned: derivational prefix.
.IP "ip:"
Planned: inflectional prefix.
.IP "tp:"
Planned: terminal prefix.

.SH "Twofold suffix stripping"

Ispell's original algorithm strips only one suffix. Hunspell can strip
an additional one (or an extra prefix in COMPLEXPREFIXES mode).

Twofold suffix stripping is a significant improvement in handling the
immense number of suffixes that characterize agglutinative languages.

A second `s' suffix (affix class Y) will be the continuation class
of the suffix `able' in the following example:

.PP
.RS
.nf
 SFX Y Y 1
 SFX Y 0 s .

 SFX X Y 1
 SFX X 0 able/Y .
.fi
.RE
.PP

Dictionary file:

.PP
.RS
.nf
 drink/X
.fi
.RE
.PP

Test file:

.PP
.RS
.nf
 drink
 drinkable
 drinkables
.fi
.RE
.PP

Test:

.PP
.RS
.nf
 $ hunspell -m -d test <test.txt
 drink st:drink
 drinkable st:drink fl:X
 drinkables st:drink fl:X fl:Y
.fi
.RE
.PP

In theory, twofold suffix stripping requires only the square root of
the number of suffix rules compared with a one-level Hunspell
implementation. In practice, this is what made it possible to
elaborate the Hungarian inflectional morphology with twofold suffix
stripping.

.SH "Extended affix classes"

Hunspell can handle more than 65000 affix classes.
There are three new syntaxes for specifying flags in affix and
dictionary files.

\fIFLAG long\fR command sets 2-character flags:

.PP
.RS
.nf
  FLAG long
  SFX Y1 Y 1
  SFX Y1 0 s 1
.fi
.RE
.PP

Dictionary record with the Y1, Z3, F? flags:

.PP
.RS
.nf
  foo/Y1Z3F?
.fi
.RE
.PP

\fIFLAG num\fR command sets numerical flags separated by comma:

.PP
.RS
.nf
  FLAG num
  SFX 65000 Y 1
  SFX 65000 0 s 1
.fi
.RE
.PP

Dictionary example:

.PP
.RS
.nf
  foo/65000,12,2756
.fi
.RE
.PP

The third one is the Unicode character flags.

.SH "Homonyms"

Hunspell's dictionary can contain repeating elements that are homonyms:

.PP
.RS
.nf
 work/A    po:verb
 work/B    po:noun
.fi
.RE
.PP

An affix file:

.PP
.RS
.nf
 SFX A Y 1
 SFX A 0 s . sf:sg3

 SFX B Y 1
 SFX B 0 s . is:plur
.fi
.RE
.PP

Test file:

.PP
.RS
.nf
 works
.fi
.RE
.PP

Test:

.PP
.RS
.nf
 $ hunspell -d test -m <testwords
 work st:work po:verb is:sg3
 work st:work po:noun is:plur
.fi
.RE
.PP

This feature also gives a way to forbid illegal prefix/suffix combinations.

.SH "Prefix--suffix dependencies"

An interesting side-effect of multi-step stripping is that the
appropriate treatment of circumfixes now comes for free.  For
instance, in Hungarian, superlatives are formed by simultaneous
prefixation of \fIleg-\fR and suffixation of \fI-bb\fR to the
adjective base.  A problem with the one-level architecture is that
there is no way to render lexical licensing of particular prefixes and
suffixes interdependent, and therefore incorrect forms are recognized
as valid, i.e. *\fIlegvén\fR = \fIleg\fR + \fIvén\fR `old'. Until
the introduction of clusters, a special treatment of the superlative
had to be hardwired in the earlier \fBHunSpell\fR code. This may have
been legitimate for a single case, but in fact prefix--suffix
dependences are ubiquitous in category-changing derivational patterns
(cf. English \fIpayable\fR, \fInon-payable\fR but \fI*non-pay\fR or
\fIdrinkable\fR, \fIundrinkable\fR but \fI*undrink\fR). In simple
words, here, the prefix \fIun-\fR is legitimate only if the base 
\fIdrink\fR is suffixed with \fI-able\fR. If both these patters are
handled by on-line affix rules and affix rules are checked against the
base only, there is no way to express this dependency and the system
will necessarily over- or undergenerate.

In the next example, suffix class R has a prefix `continuation' class
(class P).

.PP
.RS
.nf
PFX P Y 1
PFX P   0 un . [prefix_un]+

SFX S Y 1
SFX S   0 s . +PL

SFX Q Y 1
SFX Q   0 s . +3SGV

SFX R Y 1
SFX R   0 able/PS . +DER_V_ADJ_ABLE
.fi
.RE
.PP

Dictionary:

.PP
.RS
.nf
2
drink/RQ	[verb]
drink/S	[noun]
.fi
.RE
.PP

Morphological analysis:

.PP
.RS
.nf
> drink
drink[verb]
drink[noun]
> drinks
drink[verb]+3SGV
drink[noun]+PL
> drinkable
drink[verb]+DER_V_ADJ_ABLE
> drinkables
drink[verb]+DER_V_ADJ_ABLE+PL
> undrinkable
[prefix_un]+drink[verb]+DER_V_ADJ_ABLE
> undrinkables
[prefix_un]+drink[verb]+DER_V_ADJ_ABLE+PL
> undrink
Unknown word.
> undrinks
Unknown word.
.fi
.RE
.PP

.SH "Circumfix"

Conditional affixes implemented by a continuation class are not enough for
circumfixes, because a circumfix is one affix
in morphology. We also need CIRCUMFIX option for correct
morphological analysis.

.PP
.RS
.nf
# circumfixes: ~ obligate prefix/suffix combinations
# superlative in Hungarian: leg- (prefix) AND -bb (suffix)
# nagy, nagyobb, legnagyobb, legeslegnagyobb
# (great, greater, greatest, most greatest)

CIRCUMFIX X

PFX A Y 1
PFX A 0 leg/X .

PFX B Y 1
PFX B 0 legesleg/X .

SFX C Y 3
SFX C 0 obb . +COMPARATIVE
SFX C 0 obb/AX . +SUPERLATIVE
SFX C 0 obb/BX . +SUPERSUPERLATIVE
.fi
.RE
.PP

Dictionary:

.PP
.RS
.nf
1
nagy/C	[MN]
.fi
.RE
.PP

Analysis:

.PP
.RS
.nf
> nagy
nagy[MN]
> nagyobb
nagy[MN]+COMPARATIVE
> legnagyobb
nagy[MN]+SUPERLATIVE
> legeslegnagyobb
nagy[MN]+SUPERSUPERLATIVE
.fi
.RE
.PP

.SH "Compounds"

Allowing free compounding yields a decrease in the precision of
recognition, not to mention stemming and morphological analysis.
Although \fBIspell\fR introduces lexical switches to license the
compounding of bases, this proves not to be restrictive enough.
For example:

.PP
.RS
.nf
# affix file
COMPOUNDFLAG X
.fi
.RE
.PP

.PP
.RS
.nf
2
foo/X
bar/X
.fi
.RE
.PP

With this resource, \fIfoobar\fR and \fIbarfoo\fR also are accepted words.

This has been improved upon with the introduction of direction-sensitive
compounding, i.e., lexical features can specify separately whether a
base can occur as leftmost or rightmost constituent in compounds.
This, however, is still insufficient to handle the intricate patterns
of compounding, not to mention idiosyncratic (and language specific)
norms of hyphenation.

The \fBHunspell\fR algorithm currently allows any affixed form of words
that are lexically marked as potential members of compounds.
\fBHunspell\fR improved on this, and its recursive compound-checking
rules make it possible to implement the intricate spelling conventions
of Hungarian compounds. For example, the COMPOUNDWORDMAX,
COMPOUNDSYLLABLE, COMPOUNDROOT, and SYLLABLENUM options can be used to
encode the noteworthy Hungarian `6-3' rule. As a further example, in
Hungarian derivative suffixes often modify compounding properties.
Hunspell allows compounding flags on affixes, and provides two special
flags (COMPOUNDPERMITFLAG and COMPOUNDFORBIDFLAG) to permit or prohibit
compounding of the derived forms.

Several Hunspell features are needed to handle German compounding:

.PP
.RS
.nf
# German compounding

# set language to handle special casing of German sharp s

LANG de_DE

# compound flags

COMPOUNDBEGIN U
COMPOUNDMIDDLE V
COMPOUNDEND W

# Prefixes are allowed at the beginning of compounds,
# suffixes are allowed at the end of compounds by default:
# (prefix)?(root)+(affix)?
# Affixes with COMPOUNDPERMITFLAG may be inside of compounds.
COMPOUNDPERMITFLAG P

# for German fogemorphemes (Fuge-element)
# Hint: ONLYINCOMPOUND is not required everywhere, but the
# checking will be a little faster with it.

ONLYINCOMPOUND X

# forbid uppercase characters at compound word bounds
CHECKCOMPOUNDCASE

# for handling Fuge-elements with dashes (Arbeits-) 
# dash will be a special word

COMPOUNDMIN 1
WORDCHARS -

# compound settings and fogemorpheme for `Arbeit'

SFX A Y 3
SFX A 0 s/UPX .
SFX A 0 s/VPDX .
SFX A 0 0/WXD .

SFX B Y 2
SFX B 0 0/UPX .
SFX B 0 0/VWXDP .

# a suffix for `Computer'

SFX C Y 1
SFX C 0 n/WD .

# for forbid exceptions (*Arbeitsnehmer)

FORBIDDENWORD Z

# dash prefix for compounds with dash (Arbeits-Computer)

PFX - Y 1
PFX - 0 -/P .

# decapitalizing prefix
# circumfix for positioning in compounds

PFX D Y 29
PFX D A a/PX A
PFX D Ä ä/PX Ä
 .
 .
PFX D Y y/PX Y
PFX D Z z/PX Z
.fi
.RE
.PP

Example dictionary: 

.PP
.RS
.nf
4
Arbeit/A-
Computer/BC-
-/W
Arbeitsnehmer/Z
.fi
.RE
.PP

Accepted compound words with the previous resource:

.PP
.RS
.nf
Computer
Computern
Arbeit
Arbeits-
Computerarbeit
Computerarbeits-
Arbeitscomputer
Arbeitscomputern
Computerarbeitscomputer
Computerarbeitscomputern
Arbeitscomputerarbeit
Computerarbeits-Computer
Computerarbeits-Computern
.fi
.RE
.PP

Not accepted compounds:

.PP
.RS
.nf
computer
arbeit
Arbeits
arbeits
ComputerArbeit
ComputerArbeits
Arbeitcomputer
ArbeitsComputer
Computerarbeitcomputer
ComputerArbeitcomputer
ComputerArbeitscomputer
Arbeitscomputerarbeits
Computerarbeits-computer
Arbeitsnehmer
.fi
.RE
.PP

This solution is still not ideal, however, and will be replaced by a
pattern-based compound-checking algorithm which is closely integrated
with input buffer tokenization. Patterns describing compounds come as
a separate input resource that can refer to high-level properties of
constituent parts (e.g. the number of syllables, affix flags,
and containment of hyphens). The patterns are matched against potential
segmentations of compounds to assess wellformedness. 

.SH "Unicode character encoding"

Both \fBIspell\fR and \fBMyspell\fR use 8-bit character encodings,
which is a major deficiency when it comes to scalability. Although a
language like Hungarian has a standard 8-bit character set
(ISO 8859-2), that set does not allow a full implementation of
Hungarian orthographic conventions. For instance, the '--' symbol
(n-dash) is missing from this character set, despite being not only
the official symbol for delimiting parenthetic clauses in the
language but also occurring in compound words as a special `big'
hyphen.

MySpell has some 8-bit encoding tables, but there are also languages
without a standard 8-bit encoding. For example, a lot of African
languages have non-Latin or extended-Latin characters.

Similarly, using the original spelling of certain foreign names like
\fIÅngström\fR or \fIMolière\fR is encouraged by the Hungarian
spelling norm, and, since characters 'Å' and 'è' are not part of
ISO\ 8859-2, when they combine with inflections containing characters
only in ISO\ 8859-2 (like elative \fI-ből\fR, allative \fI-től\fR or
delative \fI-ről\fR with double acute), these result in words
(like \fIÅngströmről\fR or \fIMolière-től.\fR) that can not be encoded
using any single ASCII encoding scheme.

The problems raised by 8-bit encodings have long been recognized by
proponents of Unicode. It is clear that trading efficiency for
encoding-independence has its advantages when it comes to a truly
multilingual application. Hunspell implements memory- and
time-efficient Unicode handling. With non-UTF-8 character encodings,
Hunspell works with the original 8-bit strings. With UTF-8, affixes
and words are stored in UTF-8 and handled mostly in UTF-8 during
analysis; for condition checking and suggestion they are converted
to UTF-16. Unicode text analysis and spell checking have a minimal
(0-20%) time overhead, and a minimal or reasonable memory overhead
that depends on the language (its UTF-8 encoding and affixation).

.SH "Conversion of aspell dictionaries"
Aspell dictionaries can be easily converted to Hunspell format.
Conversion steps:

\fBdictionary (xx.cwl -> xx.wl):\fR

.nf
preunzip xx.cwl
wc -l < xx.wl > xx.dic
cat xx.wl >> xx.dic
.fi

\fBaffix file\fR

If the affix file exists, copy it:
.nf
cp xx_affix.dat xx.aff
.fi
If not, create it with the suitable character encoding (see xx.dat)
.nf
echo "SET ISO8859-x" > xx.aff
.fi
or
.nf
echo "SET UTF-8" > xx.aff
.fi

It is useful to add a TRY option listing the characters of the
dictionary in order of frequency, to drive edit-distance suggestions:
.nf
echo "TRY qwertzuiopasdfghjklyxcvbnmQWERTZUIOPASDFGHJKLYXCVBNM" >>xx.aff
.fi

.SH "SEE ALSO"
.B hunspell (1),
.B ispell (1),
.B ispell (4)

